try to measure a circle the diameter and
radius are easy they're just straight
lines you can measure with a ruler but
to get the circumference you need
measuring tape or a piece of string
unless there was a better way now it's
obvious that a circles circumference
would get smaller or larger along with
its diameter but the relationship goes
further than that in fact the ratio
between the two the circumference
divided by the diameter will always be
the same number no matter how big or
small the circle gets historians aren't
sure when or how this number was first
discovered but it's been known in some
form for almost four thousand years
estimates of it appear in the works of
ancient Greek babylonian chinese and
indian mathematicians and it's even
believed to have been used in building
the egyptian pyramids mathematicians
estimated it by inscribing polygons in
circles and by the year 1400 it had been
calculated to as far as 10 decimal
places so when did they finally figure
out the exact value instead of just
estimating actually never you see the
ratio of a circles circumference to its
diameter is what's known as an
irrational number one that can never be
expressed as a ratio of two whole
numbers you can come close but no matter
how precise the fraction is it will
always be just a tiny bit off so to
write it out in its decimal form you'd
have an ongoing series of digits
starting with 3.14159 and continuing
forever that's why instead of trying to
write out an infinite number of digits
every time we just refer to it using the
Greek letter pi nowadays we test the
speed of computers by having them
calculate pi and quantum computers have
been able to calculate it up to 2
quadrillion digits people even compete
to see how many digits they can memorize
and have set records for remembering
over 67,000 of them but for most
scientific uses you only need the first
40 or so and what are these scientific
uses well
just about any calculations involving
circles from the volume of a can of soda
to the orbits of satellites and it's not
just circles either because it's also
useful in studying curves pi helps us
understand periodic or oscillating
systems like clocks electromagnetic
waves and even music in statistics pi is
used in the equation to calculate the
area under a normal distribution curve
which comes in handy for figuring out
distributions of standardized test
scores financial models or margins of
error and scientific results as if that
weren't enough pi is used in particle
physics experiments such as those using
the Large Hadron Collider not only due
to its round shape but more subtly
because of the orbits in which tiny
particles move scientists have even used
PI to prove the elusive notion that
light functions as both a particle and
an electromagnetic wave and perhaps most
impressively to calculate the density of
our entire universe which by the way
still has infinitely less stuff in it
than the total number of digits in PI
you